
Internet Protocol
-----------------

1.1. Motivation
The Internet Protocol is designed for use in interconnected systems of packet-
switched computer communication networks. The internet protocol provides for 
transmitting blocks of data called datagrams from sources to destinations, 
where sources and destinations are hosts identified by fixed length addresses. 
The internet protocol also provides for fragmentation and reassembly of long 
datagrams, if necessary, for transmission through "small packet" networks. 

1.2. Scope 
The internet protocol is specifically limited in scope to provide the functions
necessary to deliver a package of bits (an internet datagram) from a source to
a destination over an interconnected system of networks. There is no mechanism 
to augment end-to-end data reliability, flow control, sequencing, or other 
services commonly found in host-to-host protocols. 

1.3. Interfaces
This protocol is called on by host-to-host protocols in an internet environment. 
This protocol calls on local network protocols to carry the internet datagrams 
to the next gateway or destination.

1.4. Operation
The internet protocol implements two basic functions: addressing and fragmentation.
The internet modules use the addresses carried in the internet header to transmit
internet datagrams toward their desitinations. The selection of a path for 
transmission is called routing. 

The model of operation is that an internet module resides in each host engaged in 
internet communication and in each gateway that interconnects networks. These 
modules share common rules for interpretting address fields and for fragmenting 
and assembling internet datagrams. In addition, these modules (especially in 
gateways) have procedures for making routing decisions and other functions. 

The internet protocol treats each internet datagram as an independent entity 
unrelated to any other internet datagram. There are no connections or logical 
circuits (virtual or otherwise). 

The internet protocol uses four key mechanisms in providing its service: Type of 
service, Time to Live, Options, and Header Checksum. 

  Type of service:    The type of service is an abstract or generalised set of 
                      parameters which characterize the service choices provided
                      in the networks that make up the internet. This type of 
                      service indication is to be used by gateways to select the
                      actual transmission parameters for a particular network, 
                      the network to be used for the next hop, or the next gateway
                      when routing an internet datagram. 

  Time to Live:       An indication of an upper bound on the lifetime of an 
                      internet datagram. It is set by the sender of the datagram 
                      and reduced at the points along the route where it is 
                      processed. If the time to live, reaches zero before the 
                      internet datagram reaches its destination, the internet 
                      datagram is destroyed. The time to live can be thought of 
                      as a self destruct time limit. 

  Options:            Provide for control functions needed or useful in some 
                      situations but unnecessary for the most common communications.

  Header Checksum:    Provides verification that the information used in processing
                      internet datagrams has been transmitted correctly. The data 
                      may contain certain errors. If the header checksum fails, the
                      internet datagram is discarded at once by the entity which
                      detects the error. 

The internet protocol does not provide a reliable communication facility. There 
are no acknowledgements either end-to-end or hop-by-hop. There is no error control 
for data, only a header checksum. There are no retransmissions. There is no flow
control.

2.2. Model of Operation
We suppose that this transmission will involve one intermediate gateway.

The sending application program prepares its data and calls on its local internet
module to send that data as a datagram and passes the destination address and 
other parameters as arguments of the call. 

The internet module prepares a datagram header and attaches the data on it. The 
internet module determines a local network address for this internet address, 
in this case it is the address of a gateway. 

It sends this datagram and the local network address to the local network 
interface. 

The local network interface creates a local network header, and attaches the 
datagram to it, then sends the result via the local network.

The datagram arrives at a gateway host wrapped in the local network header, the 
local network interface strips off this header, and turns the datagram over to 
the internet module. The internet module determines from the internet address 
that the datagram is to forwarded to another host in a second network. The 
internet module determines a local network address for the destination host. It 
calls on the local network interface for that network to send the datagram.

This local network interface creates a local network header and attaches the 
datagram sending the result to the destination host. 

At this destination host the datagram is stripped of the local net header by the 
local network interface and handed to the internet module. 

The internet module determines that the datagram is for an application program 
in this host. It passes the data to the application program in response to a 
system call, passing the source address and other parameters as a result of the 
call. 


Application                                         Application
Program                                                 Program
      \                                                 /
    Internet Module     Internet Module     Internet Module 
          \               /       \               /
          LNI-1         LNI-1     LNI-2         LNI-2
            \           /            \          /
            Local Network 1         Local Network 2
          
                      Transmission Path
  
2.3. Function Description
The datagrams are routed from one internet module to another through individual
networks based on the interpretation of an internet address. Thus, one important 
mechanism of the interent protocol is the internet address. 

In the routing of messages from one internet module to another, datagrams may need
to traverse a network whose maximum packet size is smaller than the size of the 
datagram. To overcome this difficulty, a fragmentation mechanism is provided in 
the internet protocol. 

Addressing 
A distinction is made between names, addresses, and routes. A name indicates what 
we seek. An address indicates where it is. A route indicates how to get there. 
The internet protocol deals primarily with addresses. It is the task of higher 
level (i.e., host-to-host or application) protocols to make the mapping from 
names to addresses. The internet module maps internet addresses to local net 
addresses. It is the task of lower level (i.e. local net or gateways) procedures 
to make the mapping from local net addresses to routes. 

Addresses are fixed length of four octets (32 bits). An address begins with a 
network number, followed by local address (called the "rest" field). There are 
three formats or classes of internet address - 
  (a) In class a, the high order bit is zero, the next 7 bits are the network, 
      and the last 24 bits are the local address; 
  (b) In class b, the higher order two bits are one-zero, the next 14 bits are 
      the network and the last 16 bits are the local address;
  (c) In class c, the higher order three bits are one-one-zero, the next 21 bits 
      the network and the last 8 bits are the local address 

Fragmentation 
Fragmentation of an internet datagram is necessary when it originates in a local 
net that allows a large packet size and must traverse a local net that limits 
packets to a smaller size to read its destination.
  
An internet datagram can be marked "don't fragment". Any internet datagram so 
marked is not to eb interent fragmented under any circumstances. If internet 
datagrams marked don't fragment cannot be delivered to its destination without 
fragmenting it, it is to be discarded instead.

Fragmentation, transmission and reassembly across a local network which is 
invisible to the internet protocol module is called intranet fragmentation
and may be used. 

2.4. Gateways 
Gateways implement internet protocol to forward datagrams between networks. 
Gateways also implement the Gateways to Gateway Protocol (GGP) to coordinate 
routing and other internet control information. 

In a gateway the higher level protocols need not be implemented and the GGP 
functions are added to the IP module. 





Open Questions
--------------

1. I understand the need for packet fragmentation. However, I'm not sure why some
networks would have a smaller maximum packet size. Why would that be the case? 

2. Could you explain multi-homing? 

3. How is "Type of Service" honoured? Like what's stopping someone from 
always requesting for better service (throuhput/reliability/delay)?  
